Do brain-to-text decoders need daily recalibration? We ask whether the decoder can stay frozen while the input state is managed.
Daily calibration costs user time, needs labels, and can make long-term BCI use harder.
We reframe the question: which historical input state is compatible with today's brain signal?
The GRU and output head stay frozen. Only the interface into the decoder - the input state - changes.
With the correct native-day input state, T15 reaches 9.06% PER. The wrong input state raises PER to 22-34%.
Moment matching is too weak, and small supervised calibration is only partial. Calibration helps, but should not be the first move.
The strongest low-cost move is state selection: previous input state reaches 12.21% PER with no labels or training.
Neural geometry treats each session as a cloud of neural-feature vectors. Similar cloud shape can reveal compatible past states.
DriftGate starts cheap: reuse previous, retrieve by geometry, and calibrate input only when stored states look unreliable.
Drift is structured, not random. Nearby days often have similar geometry, but older states can sometimes matter.
Geometry proposes candidates; it does not decide alone. A confidence threshold is needed before overriding recency.
Operational policy: reuse recent states, inspect stale states with geometry, and calibrate only when evidence demands it.
The decoder can stay frozen. What needs to adapt is the input state.